(Design) Exact Match Selector Options (#557)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: exploration/exact-match-selector-options.md

# Design Proposal Template

Status: **Accepted**

<details>
	<summary>Metadata</summary>
	<dl>
		<dt>Contributors</dt>
		<dd>@aphillips</dd>
		<dt>First proposed</dt>
		<dd>2023-12-08</dd>
	</dl>
</details>

## Objective

_What is this proposal trying to achieve?_

> We need to choose a name for the selector function used when no other selector is specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We need to choose a name for the selector function used to match keys according to their string value.
```

Author: This is not quite right.

```suggestion
We need to choose a name for the selector function used to match keys to the string value of an operand.
```

## Background

_What context is helpful to understand this proposal?_

This addresses issue <a href="https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/433">#433</a>
and issues raised in various design documents, notably
<a href="https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/471">#471</a>
(about number selection).

> The exact match selector function is the function used when an implementation
> cannot find another selector.
> It is also an attribute of selectors, such as `:number` or perhaps `:date`
> that need to match specific values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The exact match selector function is the simplest selection function,
which compares its input to the variant keys using string equality.

Other selectors, such as `:number` or perhaps `:date`
may provide similar functionality for their supported value types.
```

Author: Minor tweaks to this suggestion.

```suggestion
The exact match selector function is the simplest selector function,
which compares its operand to the variant keys using string equality.

Other selectors, such as `:number` and `:date` usually
provide similar functionality for their supported value types.
```

Note that both your (@eemeli) suggestion and mine lose the "defaultness" of this selector. Do you disagree with saying that this is the selector used when no other selector's signature matches?

Reviewer: Yeah. It looks like we accidentally dropped a line in #441 that was added in #431: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/812c6dde8e8834341aae42198256f76e399f9a8c/spec/syntax.md?plain=1#L313-L314

In other words, we've resolved not to have a fallback or default selector. Instead, one must always be defined. I'll add a PR re-introducing that line.

Reviewer: Otherwise, your suggestion is good, and with that I'm happy to approve this.

## Constraints

_What prior decisions and existing conditions limit the possible design?_

ICU MF1 has a selector called `com.ibm.icu.text.SelectFormat` 
associated with the keyword `select` in the MF1 syntax. 
Our design should be compatible with this selector when used for the same use case,
but it not constrained to use the same name or terminology.

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

The exact match selector is named `:string`.
The exact match selector matches the string literal value of its operand against
any sets of keys in a case-sensitive, encoding-sensitive manner.
No Unicode normalization is performed.

> [!NOTE]
> In this context "encoding-sensitive" does not mean "character encoding"
> but rather "sensitive to the sequence of code points used by the string".
> See [Character Model for the World Wide Web: String Matching](https://www.w3.org/TR/charmod-norm)

The `:string` selector is also a verbatim formatting function.
That is, the message "{$var :string}" when formatted contains the resolved string
value of the variable `$var`.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Other selectors may follow the example of `:number`,
which includes an option `select` that may take a value `exact`.

```

> date value, I might want a match like this:
>```
>.match {$myDate}
>2023-12-08 {{This only fires on this specific date}}
>* {{This fires some other time}}
>```
>A different example that makes this clearer might be numbers.
> In the `de-DE` locale, the number `42.3` is usually formatted
> as `42,3`. Consider the message:
> ```
> .local $myNum = {|42.3| :number minFractionDigits=1}
> .match {$myNum :equals}
> 42.3 {{This always matches}
> *    {{This never matches}}
> ```

As a user, I want to use a selector name that makes sense and feels natural to write.

## Requirements

_What properties does the solution have to manifest to enable the use-cases above?_

## Constraints

_What prior decisions and existing conditions limit the possible design?_

ICU MF1 has a selector called `com.ibm.icu.text.SelectFormat` 
associated with the keyword `select` in the MF1 syntax. 
Our design should be compatible with this selector when used for the same use case,
but it not constrained to use the same name or terminology.

## Proposed Design

_Describe the proposed solution. Consider syntax, formatting, errors, registry, tooling, interchange._

> The exact match selector is named `:string`.

Reviewer 2: For selection, I think this is confusing. The alternative below of `exact` seems much clearer. I could also live with `equals`.
